---
layout: post
title:  "People Leader vs. Technical Leader"
date:   2014-12-26 20:39:36
disqus_identifier: 20141226
categories: coding management
---

Before I started working at Captricity, I was an ignorant, know-nothing, over
confident college kid who thought that the only destination in an engineering
career is management. I thought that all engineers ended their career as
engineering managers, trading code with meetings. Having always loved the
problem solving aspect of coding, I dreaded the thought of work days full of
meetings. Little did I know, within one year of graduation, I ended up at the
base of the management track leading a team of 4 engineers at Captricity.

At the time, I was not prepared to become an engineering manager. One year of
experience taught me nothing about management. I knew little about running
meetings, or making important tradeoffs around engineering resources. I
struggled to find the right balance between delegating various tasks to stay
hands off and jumping right in to implement the solution myself. In the end, I
defaulted to taking on the "dirty work" (work that no one liked) while handing
off the fun stuff to my peers. While this cleared the path for most of my peers
to have uninterrupted bursts of work, I was left with an unhappy work
environment fixing more bugs than shipping features.

I also spent more time in conference rooms than at my desk coding. I was
brought in on all high level design discussions to act as a "technical
advisor," making comments on how things should be built, even though I was not
the one to execute the implementation. While the majority of the times my
comments were appreciated by the team (thank god), in some cases, they were
considered out of touch. These times were definitely not the most fun I've had
in my career.

However, over the course of one year, I learned completely new skillsets
unrelated to coding. I learned how to read resumes, interview people, do
reference checks, resolve cross departmental conflicts, propose product
features, facilitate meetings, prioritize features, and spec out multi service
architectures. I stopped taking on bugs and started to distribute the load. I
took on larger projects where my experience would help, and acted as a mentor
providing insight into legacy code bases to the junior members of the team.
With each management struggle, I came out better, learning what not to do as a
manager (as well as what I should do). Nowadays, I feel less of the negativity
towards management and I am even starting to enjoy some aspects of it. Of
course, I still don't consider myself a great manager: I think it takes years
for one to become a world class leader.

The biggest thing I learned, however, is that management is not for everyone.
Not everyone should, and can become a manager. Sometimes, people are better
utilized as a coder. I learned that some people are damn good at coding and
fully up to date even after 20+ years in the field (like [our Chief
Scientist](https://captricity.com/blog/meet-team-captricity-angshuman-angshu-guha/),
who is now my role model). And they should be respected as such, being
considered as valuable and as experienced as someone high on the management
track.

Management is not the be all, end all goal of the technical ladder. People
should always be given a choice between being a people leader, and a technical
leader that advances and innovates the technology, as opposed to the people. As
for myself, I'm still searching for answers.
